incorporate text proposed by Deepak in https://github.com/QiufangMa/template-mechanism/blob/derajara/draft-tt-netmod-yang-config-template-00.md (#5)
QiufangMa/template-mechanism: draft-xxx-netmod-yang-config-template.md

configuration data modeled by YANG. This document defines the use of YANG-based
configuration template mechanism so that the configuration data could be defined as template
and applied repeatedly to avoid the redundant definition of identical Configuration
and ensure consistency of it. This approach is both convenient and efficient,

> as it minimizes the size of the running datastore and reduces network provisioning time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and ensure the consistency of it.  This approach is convenient and efficient, because it minimizes duplication in the running datastore.
```

Updated to clarify that the main benefit is for the client.

Also, "reducing duplication" is clearer and more specific than "minimizing the size".

Finally, I'm not sure whether we can claim that this reduces network provisioning time?

Author: > Finally, I'm not sure whether we can claim that this reduces network provisioning time?

Potentially I think using template is more efficient because you could define the template just once and use it over and over again, instead of providing the same configuration over and over again, so network provisioning time may be reduced in this way.

Reviewer 2: While the NC client definitely benefits from the templates, minimizing the duplication of running datastore would also lead to reduced provisioning time and overall memory consumed on the server. so, I would prefer to have the benefits abstracted/more generic and not per client or per server

Author: > While the NC client definitely benefits from the templates, minimizing the duplication of running datastore would also lead to reduced provisioning time and overall memory consumed on the server. so, I would prefer to have the benefits abstracted/more generic and not per client or per server

So would the suggestion from Rob work for you if we remove "for the client"? I.e., 
        and ensure the consistency of it.  This approach is convenient and efficient, 
        because it minimizes duplication in the running datastore.

Reviewer 2: yes

--- middle

# Introduction

> This document considers the case of a device that contains a functional entity, characterized
> by a well-defined data nodes pattern, that is massively replicated and where each replication
> instance needs individual configuration with only limited variation.Having a device manager
> that repetitively configures each data node for every functional instance can become complex
> and prone to errors. This approach may lead to issues, such as extended configuration times,
> increased memory usage on the device, and inefficient YANG validation processes due to the
> large size of the running data store. These challenges only intensify as the system scales.
> This document proposes a technique to improve this, which is based on 'YANG templates'
> that results in a smaller running data store even when the device is very large.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document considers the case of a datastore that contains multiple subtrees
with similar or identical nodes within them, such that the datastore contains
repetitive data with limited variation. If a client has to repeatedly configure the
same nodes for each subtree, this can become complex, error-prone, and mask
the intent of the client.

This document proposes a solution to improve this, called "YANG templates",
that results in a smaller running datastore even when the configuration in \<running\> is large.
```

Given that templates is fundamentally a way to "generate" a datastore, I think it's better to stick with existing datastore terminology. So I've replaced "functional instances" with "subtrees".

I also don't think we can claim that validation will be more efficient with YANG templates, because as discussed in the interims the only time the datastore can be fully validated is when the templates have been expanded out.

Author: I agree.

Author: How to interpret "even when the device is very large"? maybe reword this as "even when the configuration in running datastore is large"

Reviewer 2: Ok to call it subtree values instead of functional instances. the idea is to identify the duplicate values.

On the validation after expansion, i remember we discussed to have some basic syntactical validation at definition. The point is, if it is validated at definition, we can reduce/avoid the checks we might have to do across multiple instance expansions, ie: if it is validated during definition, it will implicitely mean it is correct and ready to be consumed by multiple consumers(eg: multiple interfaces)

> How to interpret "even when the device is very large"? maybe reword this as "even when the configuration in running datastore is large"

Ok to reword this as "even when the configuration in running datastore is large"

Author: > On the validation after expansion, i remember we discussed to have some basic syntactical validation at definition. The point is, if it is validated at definition, we can reduce/avoid the checks we might have to do across multiple instance expansions, ie: if it is validated during definition, it will implicitely mean it is correct and ready to be consumed by multiple consumers(eg: multiple interfaces)

I guess this requires some additional explanation for the reader to understand, after all the validation logic itself is not changed by this work. I think it is already good enough to focus a few main shortcomings and thus would like to echo the suggestion from Rob here.

Reviewer 2: Agree, we need to make it clear to the reader/implementor. While the validation logic itself is not changed, we would have to describe the below situations

1> If validation is performed only after expansion, then we are essentially validating all the template consumers, which could run into thousands, which could be avoided had it been done at definition itself. So, from a performance point of view, it is better to just validate the template configuration as compared to the template-consumers.

2> If validations is performed only after expansion, it would lack a certain trust value until it is used/inherited (which leads to expansion). ie: it would deprive the possibility of defining a trusted workable template upfront and its subsequent usage with confidence whenever there is a need. especially from a SDN controller always-on/high-availability context.

Maybe a separate issue can be raised to follow up this.

Author: Sure, I've filed a separate issue for this.

> A 'YANG template' is the configuration of a functional entity that the device is instructed
> to replicate multiple times to generate copies of the entity. The technique that is outlined
> in this document allows to generate copies with the same data node values as in the template
> with the possibility, though, to overrule some of these values on an individual copy basis.
> 
> This document describes a mechanism whereby nodes of configuration data can be placed into templates,
> and templates can be applied to subtrees in a configuration datastore.
> When a template is applied to a subtree, the configuration in the template takes effect for that subtree
> (unless other configuration takes precedence, as described later in this document)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```suggestion
A 'YANG template' is a fragment of configuration that the device is instructed to
replicate multiple times to generate copies of the configuration.  This allows
repetitive subtrees of configuration to be written only once, in the template.
Individual instantiations of a template can override the values of nodes where
this is required, or add new instance-specific nodes.
```
```

Reviewer 2: Ok, Agreed, this is better conveying the message :)

> NMDA {{?RFC8342}} allows the configuration templates to be defined in \<running\>

Reviewer: I don't think NMDA mentions templates?

Author: NMDA does mention templates, but as a proprietary implementation. and NMDA states template is defined in running, and expanded in intended ds. We can mention NMDA here or not, either is fine with me.

Reviewer 2: I am ok to have NMDA mentioned here, at the same time, we also need to clearly mention how templates could work for NON-NMDA as well. ie: will there be an expansion? if yes, where? or do we just show the expanded configuration as state data. #10

Author: > I am ok to have NMDA mentioned here, at the same time, we also need to clearly mention how templates could work for NON-NMDA as well. ie: will there be an expansion? if yes, where? or do we just show the expanded configuration as state data. #10

Yes, but let's leave this to the solution part.
